Add rules for `readonly` members (#1497)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/structs.md

> *Note:* Instance fields include the hidden backing field used for automatically implemented properties (§15.7.4). *end note*
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->
> *Example*: A readonly member can modify the state of an object referred to by an instance field, even though the readonly member can't reassign that instance member. The following code demonstrates the reassigning and modifying an instance field:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-lib-without-using", name:"ReadonlyMember" } -->
> ```csharp
> public struct S
> {
>     private List<string> messages;
>
>     public S(IEnumerable<string> messages) =>
>         this.messages = new List<string>(messages);
>
>     public void InitializeMessages() =>
>         messages = new List<string>();
>
>     public readonly void AddMessage(string message)
>     {
>         if (messages == null)
>         {
>             throw new InvalidOperationException("Messages collection is not initialized.");
>         }
>         messages.Add(message);
>     }
> }
> ```
>

> > The `readonly` method `AddMessage` can change the state of a message list. The `InitializeMessages` member can clear and re-initialize the list of messages. In the first case, the `readonly` modifier is valid. In the case of `InitializeMessages`, adding the `readonly` modifier is invalid. *end example*

Reviewer: Sorry to nitpick at this late stage, and we can fix this later - but can we refer to the methods in the same order they appear in the code? Possibly just move `InitializeMessages` to after `AddMessage`.

> > The `readonly` method `AddMessage` can change the state of a message list. The `InitializeMessages` member can clear and re-initialize the list of messages. In the first case, the `readonly` modifier is valid. In the case of `InitializeMessages`, adding the `readonly` modifier is invalid. *end example*

Author: ```suggestion
> The `readonly` method `AddMessage` can change the state of a message list. The `InitializeMessages` member can clear and re-initialize the list of messages. In the case of `AddMessage`, the `readonly` modifier is valid. In the case of `InitializeMessages`, adding the `readonly` modifier is invalid. *end example*
```

Except for the differences noted in [§16.4](structs.md#164-class-and-struct-differences), the descriptions of class members provided in [§15.3](classes.md#153-class-members) through [§15.12](classes.md#1512-static-constructors) apply to struct members as well.

### §struct_readonly Readonly members

> An instance member definition that includes the `readonly` modifier has the following restrictions:

Reviewer 2: Are accessors considered members?

```cs
struct S
{
    int Prop
    {
        readonly get { return 1; }
        set { }
    }
}
```

Author: Should be, but I made this more explicit.

> - The member shall not modify the value of a direct instance member of the receiver.

Reviewer: Possibly be explicit about "field or property"? Is it okay to call a property setter if that doesn't actually change any instance state?

Reviewer: (I guess we should include field-like events in this too.)

Author: Updated in next commit

> - The member shall not modify the value of a direct instance member of the receiver.

Reviewer 3: I can find no definition of “direct [instance] member”.

Unless I’m missing them definitions for direct and indirect members are required.

Author: I did finesse my way to avoid the use of "direct" and "indirect" members.

- A readonly member may call a non-readonly member using the receiver instance only if it ensures no modifications to the receiver are observable after the readonly member returns.

> > *Example*: The following code demonstrates the rule that a readonly member shall not modify the value of a direct instance member, but can modify the members of a direct instance member:

Reviewer: I think we should say this is strongly discouraged though...

Reviewer 3: The example suggests to me that the definition of (in)direct should mention arrays

Author: Aded text on this one.

Except for the differences noted in [§16.4](structs.md#164-class-and-struct-differences), the descriptions of class members provided in [§15.3](classes.md#153-class-members) through [§15.12](classes.md#1512-static-constructors) apply to struct members as well.

### §struct_readonly Readonly members

> An instance member definition or property accessor of an instance property that includes the `readonly` modifier has the following restrictions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An instance member definition or accessor of an instance property, indexer, or event that includes the `readonly` modifier has the following restrictions:
```

Reviewer 2: Then below, it says "the member" even if at this point it had been "the accessor." Does the spec have a handy concept of "function member body" or something like that?

> - The member shall not reassign the value of an instance field of the receiver.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The member shall not reassign the value of `this` or an instance field of the receiver.
```

> - The member shall not reassign the value of `this` or an instance field of the receiver.
> - The member shall not reassign the value of an instance field-like event (§15.8.2) of the receiver.

Reviewer 2: I just remembered refs!
```suggestion
- The member shall not reassign the value of or take a writable reference to `this`, to an instance field of the receiver, or to an instance field-like event (§15.8.2) of the receiver.
```

Example (and same for field or field-like event as for `this` itself):
```cs
struct S
{
    readonly void M()
    {
        ref readonly S s = ref this; // Allowed
        ref S s = ref this; // Not allowed

        M2(ref this); // Not allowed
        M3(in this); // Allowed
    }

    void M2(ref S p) { }
    void M3(in S p) { }
}
```

> - A readonly member may call a non-readonly member using the receiver instance only if it ensures no modifications to the receiver are observable after the readonly member returns.

Reviewer 2: What does a readonly member do to ensure this? I would have thought it was an error to call a non-readonly member using the receiver instance.

Author: The roslyn implementation creates a defensive copy, and calls the non-readonly member using that copy as `this`.

There are also instances where static analysis determines that the call doesn't modify state, so the copy is elided.

That's the reason for the language that doesn't require an implementation choice.

Reviewer 2: What do you think about having it spec clearly that the compiler must perform this defensive copy? As written it sounds ambiguous, as though there might be something the language allows the user to do in order to achieve this.

Author: In the meeting, @Nigel-Ecma pointed out that saying it must be a defensive copy is standardizing one implementation choice. While it's an obvious choice, it's not the only possible implementation. I see your point. How about this alternative wording:

```suggestion
- A readonly member may call a non-readonly member using the receiver instance. A conforming implementation must ensure no modifications to the receiver are observable after the readonly member returns.
```

Reviewer 2: It's the only possible implementation that does not result in a compiler error, isn't it? I would think for portability reasons, all compilers should agree on whether or not it's an error. If it's not, then defensive copy is the only possible approach.

Reviewer 2: (Here's the reason why I'm not seeing a third approach, between making this a compile error, or making a defensive copy. A hypothetical third approach that allows the user to make the call and does _not_ make a defensive copy would involve temporary writes and then more writes to return the state. Since writes are actually observably occurring, both observable within the same thread and observable in other threads, I believe this does not satisfy the meaning of `readonly`. Therefore the only remaining approach that satisfies the meaning of readonly is one done on a defensive copy to sequester the writes somewhere safe.)

Author: I want to leave a lot of wiggle room because a theoritical compiler could improve static analysis in many places where a developer left off `readonly` *on members that don't modify state*. Yes, it's an optimization, but if the standard *requires* a defensive copy, that optimization would be prohibited.

I admit I can't think of another general implementation either. But, why prohibit one?

Reviewer 3: @jnm2 – The underlying reason “defensive copy” should not be used here is because it a language Standard defines the semantics of a language and not how those semantics are implemented on this or that architecture. Implementation should be left to implementers (for whom “how to” documentation may well be written if a language's semantics are novel enough).

A second reason is we’ve been here before, it was argued that it was *vital* for “defensive copies” to be specified, for reasons like yours – "we can’t see any other way this can be achieved” – but as @BillWagner has pointed out they since have and are now technically non-conforming to a requirement that should never have existed…

There is an issue, to be followed when there is time, on eradicating the phrase from the Standard altogether.

Stuff likes this can seep in as the Standard often has to be based on implementation notes etc. which have to redone as language specification.

Reviewer 3: @jnm2 & @BillWagner why not just:

```suggestion
- A readonly member may call a non-readonly member using the receiver instance; however no modifications to the receiver are observable after the readonly member returns.
```

Which just sticks to the required language semantics – which implementations are required to provide.

> *Note*: I followed @BillWagner’s suggestion for the semantics, which are presumably this way as there is no concern over with possible observation between the call & return – if that presumption is incorrect then the wording will need modifying appropriately, e.g. by dropping “after the readonly member returns”.

Reviewer 2: Okay, I'm following and I agree. I like Nigel's suggestion. The main things I wanted the spec to be clear on is that it is never a compiler error to make that call, while simultaneously no writes are being made to the current instance.

Reviewer 2: Okay, I'm following and I agree. I like Nigel's suggestion. The main things I wanted the spec to be clear on is that it is never a compiler error to make that call, while simultaneously no writes are being made to the current instance.

Reviewer 2: I do have one quibble about "after it returns"- I want a guarantee that there are no writes before it returns, either. I think I can make an example with a callback that shows the difference being observable.

Reviewer 2: Here is the example. It's not sufficient to say that readonly means that no writes are observable after the method returns. No writes should happen at all, within the memory of the `this` instance, if the method is readonly. I believe "observable" is also tricky to define and I would leave it out. If we keep "observable," I'd want to carefully define it, since at the level of subtle threading behaviors and such, there can be observable differences if you do even a "no-op" write, differences which go beyond observing the eventual _value_.

```cs
using System;

class Program
{
    static void Main()
    {
        var storageLocation = new S();

        Console.WriteLine(storageLocation.SomeField); // 0

        storageLocation.M(() =>
        {
            Console.WriteLine(storageLocation.SomeField); // 1
        });

        Console.WriteLine(storageLocation.SomeField); // 0
    }
}

struct S
{
    public int SomeField;

    public void M(Action someCallback)
    {
        // No writes are observable *after* M returns, yet crucially,
        // writes are observable. Readonly should disallow this scenario.

        SomeField++;
        someCallback();
        SomeField--;
    }
}
```

Author: Much more clear language came from adding the change that a `readonly` member has a `ref readonly` `this` parameter.

> - A readonly member may call a non-readonly member using the receiver instance only if it ensures no modifications to the receiver are observable after the readonly member returns.

Author: How about this slight modification to Nigel's suggestion:

```suggestion
- A readonly member may call a non-readonly member using the receiver instance; however no modifications to the receiver are observable outside the scope of the readonly member.
```

Reviewer: It feels a little odd in terms of scope usually being about the meaning of names, but I'm ambivalent.

Reviewer 3: Seeing @jskeet’s above comment in my email I spotted that all three of the original lines 147-149 appear to have the wrong actor. Back here on github I see proposed modifications to 149 do not, but that leaves 147 & 148. It is not “The member shall not reassign” – the member is not the actor, the language semantics are by preventing such an assignment. So all three lines need rewording, I have **not** checked whether the same issue appears elsewhere in the PR.

Reviewer 2: I'd rather not mention observability because I think that is a thorny topic (see <https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/1497#discussion_r2674460577>). I believe the fact that a write has happened can be observable through other effects besides reading the eventual value.

Reviewer 2: Actually, we can be far more definite. A readonly member is passed a `ref readonly this`, and therefore it cannot write to fields of `this`, nor can it call a non-readonly member on `this` because that would require passing `ref this` which it does not have. It must create a copy in order to do so, and this is exactly the concept of "defensive copy" which is demanded by the fact that a readonly member never gains a writeable reference to `this`.

I have more details now too on how any mutation that a readonly member somehow managed to do could cause access violations, since the `this` reference may be within readonly memory when calling a readonly member, but luckily we don't have to discuss that (and other side effects of mutations) because mutations are not legal through a `readonly ref this`.

Reviewer: We decided that we should say a copy is taken, and the non-readonly member is invoked on the copy. We don't need to call it "defensive" and we don't need to explicitly say that an implementation can optimize the copy away.

> *Note:* Instance fields include the hidden backing field used for automatically implemented properties (§15.7.4). *end note*
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->

> > *Example*: The following code demonstrates the reassigning and modifying an instance field. Obfuscating the intent of `readonly` in this manner is discouraged:

Reviewer 2: What does "obfuscating the intent" mean in this context, and what is being discouraged? Looking at this from my own context, both approaches seem (individually) appropriate to me. I know when I'd use one and I know when I'd use the other.

Author: I'll defer to @jskeet and @Nigel-Ecma Both thought the example demonstrated a practice they wanted "strongly discouraged".

Reviewer 3: @jnm2 – I can’t speak for @jskeet, for myself:

This is very much subjective. The usual understanding of `readonly` is, unsurprisingly, that state is not altered – this example alters what is clearly *private* state. It would be better without the `set`, as it is the readonly feels a bit like a false flag operation 😉 (you may collectively groan)

It feels a bit worse here as, depending on language, arrays may be value or reference types but are often thought of as more like values regardless – here `flags` certainly has the flavour of local value state of the struct.

It’s a subjective boundary – if the struct stored a reference to, say, a GUI window then not being able to change what window was reference, but being able to change the window’s content would likely not be viewed negatively.

Reviewer 2: A reader should never gather more from the `readonly` modifier than its technical meaning, which is "the struct instance will not have changed due to this call." It does not imply anything more broad, such as that no mutations are being made in private state through an indirection.

For example, CancellationToken.Register is `readonly` (the whole struct is readonly), but no one would imagine that this means that no mutations are being done at all within indirect private state during the Register call.

Reviewer: I think this is worth discussing more. I would be happy with softening it to something like "used with care and with clear documentation" rather than outright discouragement. `CancellationToken` is a good example to discuss.

Author: I replaced the sample with one that's more obvious and clear.
